Okay, I know that you are working on something
that
has to do with sanctuary. So tell us what sanctuary is, and we can make a show
out of what you say sanctuary is, and then we'll talk about what you're doing on
it. Lynn says that sanctuary... Lynn Abbey, one of my other authors, says that
sanctuary is a state of mind recognized by the American Psychiatric Association.
Sanctuary is a group effort. Bob Aspyn created a geography, a god list, with the
help of Andy Offutt and the other original contributors, a political situation,
and some base characters for this town. And it's called, one would say, I guess
it's the Armtid of Fantasy. It's a black hole of Calcutta type town in which
magic is operative and contract sorcery is as common as wash water and what we
then he farmed it out to a group of writers and initially everyone was supposed
to just write their story within the frame plot of the town and reference make
reference to other people's characters as walk-ons and that's what happened for
the first couple of volumes but as we got to know each other, there became sort
of a core group which decided where the volume was going to go and, you know,
where we were going to end up in that volume, what was going to happen.
Bulletins would come out as to what was going on in the town at this particular
time and you would write your story and find somebody else to link your story up
with. I did a story once and then Andy picked up right, Andy Arthur picked up
right where I left off and wrote the rest of that section and somebody else came
in before me so that we ended up writing sort of collaborative novels. And they
are really fun. They're all, to a large degree, tongue-in-cheek, and to some
degree, pretty serious. Their philosophy is a lot of fun with them, and my
character is very philosophical. We take them from
a group of historical periods, which are allowable. We were supposed to stick to
Iron Age, you know, went no farther into AD than 100, but someone came up with
steel. The justification of the Africans had steel at 500 BC. So now we have low
-grade steel, but it's not better than the good bronze. And I did the weapons
and sent around a lot of material and other people send material on other
things. And now we've invoked some more ancient guides. And from my part, it's
sort of fractured history. The sacred band in this book didn't get massacred by
Alexander at New Chaeronea. It exists. It's alive and well in Sanctuary. Every
time I come across a historical character or a group of characters, I felt got a
really sad deal out of history. I stick them into the Sanctuary construct. And
the stories had done very well. The Sanctuary Stories, the Peace World Group,
had its own panel at a World Fantasy Con and then again at a World Con. And it's
spun off a war game, a board game, red miniatures. What else do we get, paper
dolls? All sorts of good stuff. So I spun off three novels from my characters
that were in the story. And I turned in the first one to Berkeley. And I have no
idea what's going to be out. It's going to be out at the trade first. But
they're just wonderful to write. They're so much fun. and the magic is just
wonderful to do, and I have all this ancient history background that I haven't
been able to use in any of my science fiction or science fantasy because it
really pertains to Earth. Little details and stuff that I've dug up, I'm very
strong from about 2500 B.C. to about 300 B.C. I have a lot of information. I
read a lot of dead languages.
So I started to do this group of three novels, which is going to take care of
the war that we started in the group thing, but couldn't handle in the group
area because all the group stories have to take place in sanctuary in this town,
and the war is in the north. So my character and his friends go north, and they
deal with other parts of the continent and what's going on there. And there's
the same kind of running conflict between science and magic, But in this case,
magic is the science. And the magic of the science magic thing become the gods.
So we have the gods on one side and the magicians on the other side, logic on
one side, faith on the other side. And my character constantly regenerates
himself, my lead character. So he can't die, but he's just miserable. He's so
unhappy. And I know he's a real character from Earth's history, but I'm not
saying who until the end of his book, Those of you that are familiar with
ancient history will know who he is from the quotes, and those who aren't won't.
But I just love to do them. They are so much fun. They are like a paid vacation,
and they've had very good responses. Everybody seems to like them. I get a lot
of letters about the characters. Wood and sorcery, the Homeric tradition, is
very dear to my heart. I love it. I don't think it needs any justification. I
think that those values ought to be brought to people's attention once again,
and Homer was writing fantasy in his days. He was writing about something 800
years in his own past when he was writing about the siege of Troy, so I'm in
good company to do them, and they're the pure, the first pure fantasy that I've
done, so I'm having a ball with it. And it's really uplifting to do it very
free. No terrible breaks to find out this or that because I already know pretty
much the background that I'm going to use. And they're just invigorating. I just
love it. I've got a real simple yes or no question for you. Why is fantasy
getting so popular today? And we talked about the fact that not that many people
really, when it comes down to it, like the hard science and hard science
fiction, and all of a sudden fantasy is very popular, more so than every date.
What's your idea on why it's popular? Well, you'd be glad to hear that, from
what I hear from the publishers that's turning around right now, that there's
more interest now in science fiction, or what is called science fiction. I don't
know if Star Trek 2 is technically science fiction, but things with the
trappings of science fiction because of E.T. and Star Trek and those various
things. So the editors and publishers now are looking for things that they can
label science fiction. But I think that happened partially from the influx of
lady readers. I don't know if you remember the real old days of science fiction,
but I remember when a science fiction meeting of a group at Boston called the
Interplanetary Exploration Society with Isaac Asimov, Arthur Clarke, um god Hal
Clement one guy didn't know and me i was 13 and so it was all it was pretty much
boys night out and in the last few years women in fantasy you know the princess
in the tower all of that old stuff have had a resurgence i don't know what
people see in um things like the the leper books i don't remember this you know
the donaldson thing i truly do not understand why people write that sort of book
he's a very nice guy and lord knows i have tried but um the whole the good and
evil archetypal thing i think it goes along with you know back to the earth and
fundamentalism and uh creationism and all of this kind of rejection of the
modern world and back to a simpler age. But I do also think that it's sort of
over now in that sense. And the kind of fantasy that we're writing is not that
kind of high fantasy, which is pretty and dense. And I mean, this is mean and
nasty and get down with lots of ancient weaponry and, you know, the proper siege
engine for the period in time, more like an ancient historical. but i think they
went over to fantasy from romance i mean if you look at the definition of
romance in a dictionary you'll see that in general most dictionaries define it
as a story that takes place in a exotic locale which indeed is what science
fiction is too but the romance element in fantasy is much greater and also it's
simple as far as writers producing it it's a very simple form to produce badly
so a lot of young writers try to start out there you get a lot of first novels
in um fantasy I mean I've commented a couple of times on first novels that were
fantasy novels because usually one applies a different standard to a first novel
at least I'm willing to apply a different standard and will accept less from
somebody's first novel than I will somebody later on um and my standards for
fantasy are lower I would like them to give me a good ride take me in place
remove me from the scene and just not strain my credibility too very much and
that's all I want from fantasy but I don't have time to read much of it anymore
and I hear it's getting very very bad and but I hear this from other writers so
I don't know writers are very jealous as you probably have realized uh so maybe
it's not getting as bad as I think it is, but there certainly are an awful lot
of books out there that say fantasy on them. I can't argue with you about that.
It does take a certain amount more preparation
to write science fiction. One can write bad fantasy with just the amount of
Christian mysticism one has picked up by growing up in the Midwest or wherever
one has grown up and gone to Sunday school. where a good fantasy, you know, an
ancient fantasy, one that has some other cultural bias or a piece of science
fiction takes a little more literacy. And I just think it's an easy place for
them to start. Why the readers keep buying bad books... You know, I said in an
interview once that everybody that gets a bad book should send it back to their
publisher. And I think if we all send all the bad books back... You know, not
ask for money back, just send them back. That there'd be less bad books. That
they'd get tired of receiving them all and they would eventually get the
message. But that's about the only thing you can do. You can refuse to buy a bad
book or a book that doesn't meet your standards. But if you buy it, you've done
them a favor, and you'll continue the problem. I don't want literature to become
like television. I don't want it to keep thinking, you know, level by level. So
that they used to talk about, you know, you're writing for a 12-year-old. Now
they're talking about you're writing for an 8-year-old. When I start, they start
telling me I have to write for a 6-year-old. I'm out of business because I
cannot write. I write down. I have to believe that the reader out there is write
with me. And I think fantasy writers, almost without exception, write down. They
write to a level below the level that they're thinking on, and I don't think
that's healthy. When we interviewed Piers Anthony, he said, I asked him a
similar question, he said that when he wants to write for fun, what he really
enjoys writing is science fiction. But when he wants to make money, he writes
fantasy. And I guess that's the way it is now, that that's where the money is.
That, well, I didn't know. I got a lot more money for the carrying books than I
had thought one could get for science fiction. So, I mean, the books went to
auction here and then they went to auction in England and then I sold them in
Germany. And I'm getting a portion. Now, to have enough extra money to do that
says something good as to what a publisher is willing to risk in science
fiction. And the books are running out. So somebody's buying him. I don't know
what kind of money he's talking about, but I do know that he's been getting on
the best dollar list with books that seem to be written exclusively for an
audience of fans, which I find very strange.
nightmares and like that. Those are his, right? Right. I don't read that
anymore. I used to read his things when he was doing wonderful stuff way back. I
don't know if you read the one about the dinosaur and the bird. He had one about
a great bird. Yeah, was that Orn? Orn. It was wonderful. I wept. I just loved
it. Any writer in any area has to fight losing their edge, letting creative
pressure cause you to write something you don't want to write. Because of the
way I write, I can't, I don't have that problem. That can't happen to me because
I can't manufacture a story. I get it, either a story is there for me or it
isn't. I can't just sit down and say, okay, you know, I need to make some money
so I'm going to write a story and it's going to be about this or that. I have to
get interested and then I go into an obsessive state. and the sanctuary things,
even though they're fantasy, allowed me to do what I couldn't do otherwise. If
you think the market for science fiction is difficult, you should try the market
for a serious historical. That is a very difficult market to write. There hasn't
been good money for books like that since the 50s, and that's when all good
books were written like Margaret Yorstner and those kinds of quality
historicals. No one is doing it anymore. It almost cannot be done, Creation,
with just the exception of Prove the Rule, the Gore Vidal book. I promised
those Sanctuary characters, if they would just stay in these little tiny spaces,
I would get them their own deal. So I did. I got them a deal for three books,
and they're very happy, and they're giving me good book back. But I can't, I
just couldn't, I wouldn't know where to start to create. That's why I don't
write for magazines, because they're looking for you to write in a particular
slot and to create almost a little joke that short story for me and I don't care
for it. I think if you write an honest book and you have something to say, that
the readership that I want will find it. And that's all I'm asking. Because, you
know, there's always a silhouette romance for somebody who can't read my stuff.
And I don't pretend to write for everybody. And if I hit our bestseller, we've
got 120,000 out of Earthdreams. If we've got 150, we might hit the New York
Times list. But the last volume of These Were Things, which was called Storm
Season, was on the top 50 at Dalton's and Walden books nationwide when it came
out. And it's a phenomena. It just happens. I don't think you can sit down and
plan to write a book that will be both a good book and a book that will be a
bestseller. I don't think you can make that many compromises. And if a writer
loses their edge for making money, writes things that they don't believe in,
writes books for the wrong reason,
it's just trade-off. In the end, you're not alive and your books are there, and
that's what's left. And I tend to want to write for building a corpus of work
that I think has some value. I mean, you're getting into people's heads. It's a
hell of an opportunity to waste. Somebody takes the time and the effort to sit
down and read your book, not only go out and find it, but bring it home and turn
off the TV and shout out to kids and let the thought out and read your book is a
tremendous, almost an honor. I love it that people read your book, let you into
their head, become one with you for that amount of time. And you ought to have
something to offer, something to give them. We do occasionally other things
under pseudonyms, political things, espionage, politics, stuff I know about
intelligence gathering. In a book like that, one has to pay attention to
formula. You have to have a certain amount of action in a book. But I also try
to have a certain amount of action in my fiction because I think story, you
should never lose sight of the fact that there has to be story. But to write
just for money, I've never tried to do it that way. I write what I want to write
and then I try to get money for it afterwards. I wouldn't know where to start.
He's probably written many more books than I am. Is he older? I think he's
about... I think he's pretty close to 50, yeah. I think at that point one's
trying to cover one's bets too. And more power to him. The more books that do
well, the better off everybody is in this market. Books of any sort. it's just
nice to know that people are reading but again I haven't read those books so I
don't know whether they have good content or they don't have good content but if
somebody wants to write science fiction they should be writing science fiction
and he's a good writer or it was when I read him at the time of porn that he was
a good strong writer but it's just a sad state of affairs if that is indeed
still the case Okay, that's my list of questions thanks very much it's been very
enjoyable I only interview people whom I enjoy reading their books and I don't
interview anybody who I don't read and who I don't like their stuff so it's a
pleasure to get into your head too after your being in my head for so long
That's wonderful I had a great time This is the most free that I've been able to
be with somebody. Well, good. Let me ask you, if it would be any trouble, if I
could send my Kerrion books to you with postage and all that stuff, and have you
signed them? Oh, certainly. And if there's room, stick the Xerox, if that's
convenient. Absolutely. Okay, I would appreciate that. I'm a book collector,
which is how I got into science fiction. I think I'm a couple of years younger
than you. I was born in 1948. Yeah, I'm 46. Right in there, that's the slot.
Yeah, right. So we kind of went through the same social time. I used to live in
New York for a while. We lived in upstate New York and stayed down in the
village for most of one summer. And we had a really good time up there. I like
that part of the country. I only came back to Texas because of economic
exigencies. But it's kind of nice out here because we do have a radio show out
here, who would have thunk that? I don't know. I think you have to go to New
York and then you have to leave New York. Everybody should have the experience,
but no one should be sentenced there for any long period of time. I mean, I
don't think I could be as creative there. It's so noisy, mental noise. A lot of
noise there. Yeah, I can appreciate that. Okay, I'll get you my books one of
these days, and I'll try to get them out pretty fast. I do appreciate that. I'll
write the shows probably sometime in February, and we'll voice them over and get
you copies of them. Okay. And I sure look forward to seeing what you put out.
I'll have to read The Sanctuary stuff. I have not read that because I did read
Donaldson. I do try to read some fantasy, but I just flat don't enjoy it as
much. Did you enjoy that Donaldson stuff? No, I did not. It wasn't just me,
then. I did it. I read it, in fact, just between me and you and the gatepost. I
think the three of us are going to flip a coin and whoever loses gets to
interview him. Although he's a hell of a nice guy. I've met him, he really is.
But I just don't think I'm up to doing an interview on that stuff. I wouldn't
know what to answer. I know, that's the problem. What can you say? And one of
our guys is an English professor, Tolkien scholar and all that. Maybe he could
do it. Yeah, that's what I'm hoping he loses. But again, I really look forward
to seeing what you put out in the future. and, uh... Listen, if you would return
it, you know, within a year or so, I'll also send you the Choragini book. Oh,
sure. Okay? Yeah. You know, I've finished. I've been through it, and I've got a
dog ear. You'll have to deal with my dog ears. Oh, yeah, no problem whatsoever.
I appreciate that. Yeah, okay. I will send enough postage to cover that then and
all that. I don't want you to be out anything. That's a very nice gesture. Okay.
Janet, it's been really nice. Thanks for considering, and we'll talk to you
later, I'm sure. You really enjoyed it. Bye-bye now. Bye-bye.